ID: CTRL_007
Bank: NONCHINA_CONTROL
Source: Smithsonian
Title: The Most Anticipated Museum Openings of 2023
Publication date: 2023-01-18

When it comes to museum exhibitions, the Smithsonian Institution has another impressive lineup slated for 2023. Visitors to the National Museum of African American History and Culture will be able to explore the alternate realities of the Black diaspora through artifacts like graphic novels, cover art and costumes, while the now 100-year-old National Museum of Asian Art is hosting the first major exhibition in the United States dedicated to Anyang, the capital of China’s Shang dynasty, which was occupied from circa 1250 B.C.E. to circa 1050 B.C.E. The Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum will delve into the history behind symbols, from the Olympic rings to emoji. Over at the National Zoo, a historic bird house is being transformed into a series of spectacular walk-through aviaries for migratory songbirds, waterfowl and shorebirds.

In the world at large, 2023 is to be the year of long-awaited museum openings—this may finally be the year that the Grand Egyptian Museum, two decades in the making, will start welcoming the public—and immersive exhibitions allowing visitors to, say, experience flight from a replica cockpit of a Lockheed Electra 10E or play distorted riffs on a punk legend’s guitar. Whether you’re looking to converse with robots, become part of an evolving dialogue on the National Mall or learn more about the untold stories of African Americans, modern art, the Cold War or dinosaur fossils, these ten museums are sure to enlighten, inspire and offer whole new ways of seeing our surrounds.

The Punk Rock Museum; Las Vegas, Nevada

Punk rock music first emerged in the 1970s, and its nonconformist ethos has been influencing everything including art and fashion in the decades since. Now, this largely anti-establishment and DIY subculture (think Patti Smith, Doc Martens and Social Distortion “Skelly” tattoos) has a new place to call home.

Set to open its doors on March 10 between downtown Vegas and the Strip, the 12,000-square-foot Punk Rock Museum is a brainchild of the “Punk Collective,” a group of musicians and industry professionals that include Vinnie Fiorello, former drummer for American ska punk band Less Than Jake, and Fletcher Dragge, guitarist for Pennywise. Their goal is to preserve the ephemera of the punk rock movement for future generations.

Visitors will be treated to an original collection of concert fliers, handwritten lyrics, punk clothing and other artifacts from bands like Blondie and Devo. The museum will also feature instruments, such as bass guitars, that were used by real-life punk musicians, including members of Strung Out and Rise Against—and that museum-goers can actually play.

Along with a shop where you’ll be able to pick up T-shirts, hoodies and other punk-related merchandise, the museum will feature its own tattoo parlor and wedding chapel, as well as a dive-style bar that—in true punk rock fashion—serves up warm beer.

What’s especially cool: Come April, you’ll be able to book guided tours led by more than a dozen actual punk legends themselves, including Suicidal Tendencies’ Louiche Mayorga and The Offspring’s Noodles, who can share stories about his time as a school janitor during the band’s early days.

Amelia Earhart Hangar Museum; Atchison, Kansas

Opening this spring at Kansas’ Amelia Earhart Memorial Airport in Atchison—the same town where Earhart was born and raised—the Amelia Earhart Hangar Museum aims to honor the pioneering aviator’s enduring legacy with a range of exhibitions that capture her adventurous spirit.

A true trailblazer, Earhart led the advancement of women in aviation, becoming the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean and the first person to fly solo from Hawaii to the U.S. mainland.

The 17,000-square-foot hangar facility features Art Deco design motifs that call to mind the 1920s and ’30s, formative decades in aviation history. Inside, visitors can experience Earhart’s life through 14 interactive and immersive exhibitions, from her early Kansas childhood through her work as a mechanic and nurse and onto her many aviation successes. Don a pair of virtual reality goggles and experience a trans-Atlantic flight, encountering the same weather challenges as Earhart did in her bright red Lockheed Vega 5B. Browse a digitized version of her in-flight logbook. Or take in 3D holograms that showcase technological innovations in aviation.

The museum’s displays also describe the feats of other female aviators; detail the impact of celestial navigation, radio waves and atmospheric conditions on flying; and showcase Muriel—the world’s last remaining Lockheed Electra 10E and one that’s identical to the aircraft Earhart flew on her final trip. A full-scale replica of Muriel’s cockpit, which is akin to Earhart’s own “flying laboratory,” is on hand for visitors to explore.

The Amelia Earhart Hangar Museum is in the process of becoming a Smithsonian Affiliate, which would enable their research institutes to share collections and exhibits, and to conduct joint research.

Jean and Ric Edelman Fossil Park and Museum; Glassboro, New Jersey

Slated to open in May, the Jean and Ric Edelman Fossil Park and Museum is 44,000 square feet of exhibit space perched above a former marl quarry, one filled with marine and terrestrial fossils from 66 million years ago, just before a massive meteorite destroyed dinosaur life on earth. This is the only facility east of the Mississippi river that features an actively open quarry for public digs.

Part of Rowan University in South Jersey, the museum and surrounding 65-acre Edelman Fossil Park will help shed light on the Late Cretaceous period—when dinosaurs roamed the New Jersey coastline—and the world’s fifth mass extinction. But while exhibitions take a look at the deep past, the structure itself is extremely forward-thinking. It blends sustainable design and eco-friendly features that include geothermal heating and cooling systems, and it aims to become New Jersey’s largest public net-zero facility, meaning it will remove as many greenhouse gasses as it emits.

Once inside, you can roam the “Hall of Cretaceous Seas,” which features dozens of marine recreations (including that of a mosasaur, a type of sea-dwelling lizard that was unearthed onsite) by world-renowned paleo sculptor Gary Staab, or visit “Critter Cove,” where you can get up-close with real-life sea and land animals, like lizards, fish and amphibians, that are genetically connected to the Late Cretaceous. There will be hands-on learning stations; a “Hall of Extinction and Hope,” where visitors can explore ways to take action against climate change; and even a paleo-themed playground for kids.

Afterwards, visitors can head outside to the quarry to dig for fossils of their own, alongside Rowan University’s top paleontologists. Fossils of boney fish and marine crocodiles have been found here, but amateur fossil hunters usually walk away with calcified shells and an occasional shark tooth.

American Museum of Natural History’s Richard Gilder Center for Science, Education and Innovation; New York City

The Richard Gilder Center for Science, Education, and Innovation Opens Winter 2023

For more than a century and a half, the imposing American Museum of Natural History has stood watch over Manhattan’s Upper West Side. Now, this impressive stretch of structures highlighting everything from plants and meteorites to human cultural artifacts is about to get even bigger. Opening February 17, the museum’s new Richard Gilder Center for Science, Education and Innovation will become home to nearly four million scientific specimens, or 12 percent of the museum’s overall collection.

More than an addition, the 230,000-square-foot center offers an entirely new way of exploring the museum, starting with its towering four-story atrium. This glass and stone structure adds a bit of cohesion to the museum’s overall campus, opening up formerly dead-end spaces and making it easier to get from one area to the next.

The Gilder Center is home to a “Collections Core,” a vertical collections facility featuring floor-to-ceiling exhibits on everything from archaeology to invertebrate biology, as well as galleries like “Invisible Worlds,” an immersive science-and-art experience that transports visitors—using massive, wall-high projections—inside the human brain, a strand of DNA or elsewhere. In the center’s insectarium, you’ll be able to listen to the soundtrack of Central Park insects and stroll beneath a transparent skybridge, which doubles as a walkway for the largest leafcutter ant colony in the U.S. Then wander through the center’s vivarium, a self-contained enclosure that’s home to 60 free-flying butterfly species. A new research library and learning center hosts a wonderful collection of rare books as well as sweeping views of the city.
