ID: CTRL_011
Bank: NONCHINA_CONTROL
Source: Smithsonian
Title: Twenty-Four Smithsonian Shows to See in 2024
Publication date: 2024-01-11

For the year 2024, here are 24 things to look forward to at the Smithsonian. Illustration by Emily Lankiewicz

The new year brings a kaleidoscopic array of exhibitions to the various Smithsonian museums, where recent trends in curation have shows often running longer than before, in some cases for more than a year.

That means some of the most popular museums, such as the National Museum of Natural History, have no new exhibitions to announce this calendar year as they extend current offerings. Similarly, the National Air and Space Museum will wait until the extensive renovations to its downtown Washington facility are fully complete next year to unveil new exhibitions, although, with tickets still required for admission, it’s advisable to plan ahead for the current, highly sought-after offerings.

The Smithsonian’s many other museums along the National Mall and beyond still have a full roster of openings, with curators highlighting major anniversaries, new technologies, thought-provoking artists and the upcoming presidential election.

For the year 2024, here are 24 things to look forward to at the Smithsonian; all museums are located in Washington, D.C. unless otherwise specified.

Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” Speech, National Museum of African American History and Culture

To help celebrate the legacy and life of Martin Luther King Jr., a copy of the civil rights leader’s original “I Have a Dream” speech from the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom returned to public view on January 8. The early draft, written without the iconic phrase that made the speech famous, will be seen along with other items associated with King, including a Congressional Gold Medal issued posthumously in 2014, a 1956 handbill advertising a prayer meeting in Boston and a laundry pail used by King during the 1965 march from Selma to Montgomery. (On view through March 4, 2024)

“Star Power: Photographs From Hollywood’s Golden Age by George Hurrell,” National Portrait Gallery

The go-to photographer for 1930s and ’40s glamour, George Hurrell helped shape how the public saw the world’s top film stars. Even today, decades after the apex of his influence, Hurrell’s photography, which will be highlighted in a new exhibition, defines the era when Hollywood stars became household names. Under contract first by MGM, later by Warner Bros., as well as operating his own studio on Sunset Boulevard, Hurrell captured glossy, dramatically lit shots of Greta Garbo, Spencer Tracy, Clark Gable and Joan Crawford, among others. Norma Shearer reportedly refused to allow herself to be photographed by anyone else, and he’d later help build the career of Rita Hayworth through still portraits alone. (March 1, 2024, through January 5, 2025)

“Fighters for Freedom: William H. Johnson Picturing Justice,” Smithsonian American Art Museum

Born in the Deep South, William H. Johnson emerged as one of the greatest American artists of the 20th century. His influences drew from his education in New York, living in Europe, experiences with modern art and folk art, and time well spent with fellow Black artists during the Harlem Renaissance. In the 1940s, Johnson created his “Fighters for Freedom” series as a tribute to African American activists, scientists, teachers and performers including Harriet Tubman, George Washington Carver and Marian Anderson. The series also featured some international leaders working to bring peace to the world, such as Mahatma Gandhi. This exhibition, which first traveled to five regional art museums across the country, is drawn from the more than 1,000 works by Johnson held in the Smithsonian’s collections. (March 8 through September 8, 2024)

“Change YOUR Game / Cambia TU Juego,” National Museum of American History

A new family-friendly interactive exhibition at the American History Museum’s Lemelson Center for the Study of Invention and Innovation will show how new technologies and innovations have improved athletic performance in sport over the years, including a Crash Cloud football helmet, cameras developed to automate line calls at professional tennis’ U.S. Open and prosthetics that make extreme sports possible for athletes with amputations. Visitors can become their own problem solvers by creating game-changers for their daily lives through hands-on activities. (March 15, 2024, through TBD)

“Becoming Visible,” Smithsonian American Women’s History Museum

In the three years since Congress passed a law establishing the Smithsonian American Women’s History Museum, the Institution has been doing the hard work of building a museum from the ground up. This herculean effort involves hiring new staff, building a collection, finding a site for the new organization and beginning the educational outreach at the core of every museum’s mission. With a physical structure years away, the museum is launching its first digital exhibition, “Becoming Visible,” this March on its website. The ten-minute experience will highlight the stories of five women whose narratives haven’t been traditionally included in retellings of American history. (Launches March 2024)

“Staging the Supernatural: Ghosts and the Theater in Japanese Prints,” National Museum of Asian Art

Originally set to open just before Halloween last year, this show featuring 60 objects from the museum’s collections was delayed by a last-minute structural emergency. Whether it was caused by spectral beings was never determined, but “Staging the Supernatural” is now set to open in March, with works from the 18th to early 20th centuries exploring how spirits were projected onstage in the vibrant theater traditions of Kabuki and Noh. (March 23 through October 6, 2024)

“Zen and the Open Road,” National Museum of American History

This year marks the 50th anniversary of Robert Pirsig’s unexpected philosophical bestseller Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, inspired by a real-life father-son road trip from Minneapolis to San Francisco. To celebrate the book and its legacy, the museum will be putting on view the very 1966 Honda CB77 Super Hawk motorcycle that was part of the literary trip. Also in the exhibition are both the manuscript it took Pirsig four years to write and a signed first edition, as well as the author’s typewriter and artifacts from the sailboat he bought with his royalties. (April 15, 2024, through TBD)

“Brilliant Exiles: American Women in Paris, 1900-1939,” National Portrait Gallery

At the start of the 20th century, the City of Light attracted scores of young creatives seeking inspiration in art, literature, design, publishing, music, fashion, theater and dance. What sets this exhibition apart from previous explorations of the movement is that curators have focused on the American women in Paris, from 1900 until the outbreak of World War II. It includes portraits of such leading cultural lights as Josephine Baker, Isadora Duncan, Zelda Fitzgerald, Anaïs Nin, Gertrude Stein and Ethel Waters. (April 26, 2024, through February 23, 2025)

“Do Ho Suh: Public Figures,” National Museum of Asian Art

Last seen locally in 2018, when the Smithsonian American Art Museum showcased his large-scale fabric recreations of his former homes, the South Korean artist Do Ho Suh will return to Washington to help mark the continuing centennial celebrations at the Freer Gallery of Art, which opened in 1923. For this exhibition, Suh will present a new version of his outdoor public art piece, Public Figures. A seemingly empty base for a statue, the piece is held up by hundreds of tiny figures, all working together to lift the pedestal. The first new work installed outside the Freer in more than 30 years, Suh’s sculpture will be on view through 2029. (April 27, 2024, through 2029)

“Unbound: Narrative Art of the Plains,” National Museum of the American Indian

More than 50 contemporary works commissioned by the museum will be juxtaposed with historical hides, muslins and ledger books to offer a full portrait of narrative art among the Native nations of the Great Plains between the 18th and 21st centuries. From 19th-century sketches by Cheyenne artist Bear’s Heart to adaptations of those designs on modern canvases by Martin E. Red Bear (Oglala/Sicangu Lakota) and Lauren Good Day (Arikara/Hidatsa/Blackfeet/Plains Cree), the exhibition—an expanded iteration of a show first held in New York in 2016—will examine ceremonial events, wars, family life and Native identity. (May 18, 2024, through January 20, 2026)

“OSGEMEOS: Endless Story,” Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden

The first U.S. museum survey of art by Gustavo and Otavio Pandolfo, identical twins who collaborate under the name OSGEMEOS (Portuguese for “the twins”), “Endless Story” will bring together 1,000 artworks, photographs and archival materials reflecting the Brazilian duo’s hip-hop-inspired urban graffiti traditions. In addition to works from the brothers’ childhoods and large-scale paintings on wood and canvas, the show will include The Moon Room, a 2022 installation featuring sound, special architecture and custom wallpaper. (May 18, 2024, through July 6, 2025)
