ID: CTRL_015
Bank: NONCHINA_CONTROL
Source: The Guardian
Title: Where tourists seldom tread, part 12: five more UK towns with hidden histories
Publication date: 2024-10-02

Scratch beneath the surface of these once well-connected but now overlooked towns and their grand civic buildings and streets reveal a rich seam of history, legend and memory

Where tourists seldom tread, parts 1-11

Chris Moss

Ports, rivers, canals, railways, pilgrims’ pathways: these oft-overlooked, deeply engaging towns grew around transport and, as they expanded, created local networks. We usually think of leisure travel in terms of long-distance trains, cars on open roads, coaches from A to B and country walks. But suburban bus trips, urban hikes and commuter trains offer rich possibilities.

Wolverhampton, West Midlands

Approaching from the north by rail, it’s where the green turns grey, though not unrelentingly. A canal, a railway, riotous quantities of buddleia, garish splashes of graffiti. The first big-brand box to come into view is Tesla, which looks like the cars – hermetically sealed, plasticky, futuristic but without flair. Beside it is a mountain of scrap metal: the end of all car journeys. Two centres of learning are next up. One is the Thomas Telford university technical college – named, aptly, for the colossus of roads. A slick looking building closer to the line is the National Brownfield Institute. This, too, is right at home; all it surveys is potentiality and prospects of a good return.

A serious built-up area will produce different emotions in different people at different times. I live in a farmhouse; I’ve not been out for two weeks. I can feel my shins twitching. Edgelands can be exhilarating.

Wolverhampton became a city in 2000. It feels and looks as if it’s been one for 150 years. It has grand civic buildings, a serious railway station, a flash multi-platformed bus station. My first stop is the Posada, a proper city pub. I’ve been told the Black Country still drinks mild but the man behind the bar tells me he bought a keg for some Camra chaps, but they had two halves and never came back, and he was left with a drink no one wanted. Perhaps I’m not in the real Black Country yet?

Across the road is the city-sized art gallery. Without prompting from me, a staff member takes me back to the entrance and tells me to make sure I see that building and that obelisk, adding that TE Lawrence drank at the Posada and Jim Lea of Slade is a regular visitor to the gallery. Lawrence of Arabia? “Yes, apparently he worked in engineering,” she says. I look him up. Apparently, TE was overseeing the assembly of a new batch of RAF boat engines at Henry Meadows Ltd. He called Wolverhampton “squalid” and a “cesspit” – his lodgings were allegedly bug-infested – adding that it had “the worse mannered local press of my experience!”

The gallery has the UK’s largest pop art collection outside London. Curator David Rodgers began collecting in the late 1960s when the style was new and controversial – and pieces affordable. Parts of the media thought he was squandering public money. But he was a visionary. I spent an hour all by myself with world-class works including a 1964 Warhol oil, Jacqueline, and one of his Campbell’s Soup screenprints, Roy Lichtenstein’s Purist Painting With Bottles (1975) and Pauline Boty’s tender portrait of Marilyn Monroe, Colour Her Gone (1962). Captions by local LGBTQ+ opinion-formers added a queer slant. Patrick Caulfield’s 1971 painting Tandoori Restaurant – in shades of turmeric and saffron flower – truly belongs here in the West Midlands.

Wolverhampton art gallery has the UK’s largest pop art collection outside London. I spent an hour all by myself with world-class works

Wolverhampton’s motto is “Out of darkness cometh light”. The Black Country was once “the workshop of the world”. Areas had specialisms, as did genders in some cases. There were female chainmakers in Cradley Heath. Children could start making nails from the age of seven. Wolverhampton was known for its locks, keys, horseshoes, as well as grease, beer and kitchen furniture. Japanning was a huge trade. A cabinet on the first floor is filled with exquisite brooches, belt buckles, rosaries, buttons and pendants made in Bilston, formerly a powerhouse of “decorative enamel production”. It was also home to houseware brand Beldray.

Ed Isaacs, a retired Wolverhampton council housing officer, has reinvented himself as an urban sketcher. His drawings capture the contemporary sprawl-scape: Lidl stores, Greggs branches, parked cars, landfill sites, street furniture, tubing and piping and the unexplained bits of industry that jut out from weeds and behind railings. He calls it “obsessive markmaking”. There is an evolving tradition of West Midlands new impressionism; the works of Ed Isaacs, Tom Hicks, David Rayson and George Shaw make you want to walk to see the actual places, just as Monet-worshippers go to Rouen or Van Goghers go vagabond in Arles. Again pop art comes to mind; the horribly familiar, seen afresh.

Harwich, Essex

Mockba. Hoek. Warszawa. Berlin. Minsk. My one memory of Harwich relates to the boat train from Liverpool Street station in the mid-80s. Parkeston Quay didn’t sound like a song from Bowie’s Low album, but it was a portal to them. I arrived on the Hook-Harwich ferry after visits to Poland and Czechoslovakia but never used it to escape London to go east. But how I wanted to. I was obsessed with the writers Hašek, Kundera, Kafka, Miłosz – and the cold war frontier. I was at university in London and, passing through Liverpool Street in the early evening on my way home, I would glance enviously at the destinations before grumbling my way down to the tube.

In the lounge at the Pier hotel are vintage posters proclaiming “Harwich for the continent” and advertisements for holidays in Zeebrugge and Antwerp. In the era before car ferries and cheap flights, there were boats to Esbjerg, Gothenburg, Hamburg, Helsingborg, Hirtshals and Oslo. A century ago, ferries transported entire trains to Europe in true roll-on, roll-off fashion. Between 1924 and 1987, trains from the Hook linked it to Munich, Stockholm and, briefly, the Orient Express routes.

A heritage trail takes an hour but dazzles with epoch-making storylines and notable names; the Harwich Society offers free guided tours to individuals every Saturday between May and September. Sue Daish, the town council’s first female high steward and a trustee of the society, opens doors for me. We visit the High Lighthouse, Low Lighthouse (which houses a Maritime Museum), Treadwheel Crane and circular Redoubt Fort – built on a tump south of the centre in 1808 to repel Napoleon.

I’m not sure I have ever seen such a density of period architecture in so small an area

We linger upstairs in the jettied house of Mayflower captain Christopher Jones, and in a room in the town’s Guildhall once used to hold prisoners awaiting trial, daubed with elaborate carvings of ships, gallows and symbols to ward off evil spirits, dating from the late 18th century. One shows a ship flying the stars and stripes around the time of the American war of independence – possibly the earliest depiction of the US flag. I nostalgise at the Electric Palace cinema, built in 1911 and the oldest unaltered purpose-built cinema in Britain.

Harwich’s pubs are among the finest in England. Some 94 pubs have been named at 48 different sites. Our ancestors were sociable creatures, thirsty workers; home was not the high-walled castle it has become. Only about 10 remain and are lovely and look ancient but well used.

I’m not sure I have ever seen such a density of period architecture in so small an area. Heritage in cities exists in pockets, providing diversions from now. In the countryside, it might be a stately home or ruined abbey, with ice lollies and cream tea. Harwich Town, though, is haunted by its old, alluringly allusive places. Do they hold it back, or anchor it?

After dark, I stand and watch the ships load and unload at Felixstowe, and am thrilled when a horn sounds and one pushes away for Shanghai, Santos, Panama, Singapore, Hoek.

Gateshead, Tyne and Wear

A circular bus route – uniquely relaxing – is a great way to recce a new town. The 51 and 52 (one route, two directions) is known as the East Gateshead Orbital. In just over an hour, I will be able to say I have been to all the places I can see on my map. There’s Felling and Deckham, Wrekenton, Low Fell, High Fell, Sheriff Hill, Leam Lane, and Windy Nook. There will be those who never made it to Sheriff Hill, for one reason or another. I can tell them about it.
