ID: CTRL_002
Bank: NONCHINA_CONTROL
Source: The Washington Post
Title: Maggie Filardo never met her paternal grandfather, who died before she was born. But Pietro Antonio Filardo gave his granddaughter one of the greatest gifts of her life: Italian citizenship. Five years ago, after going through a process she began near the beginning of the first Trump administration, the American-born Filardo and her two children became dual citizens through her ancestry. She cited several reasons for pursuing a second citizenship: With none of her Italian relatives still living, she wanted to instill in her offspring an appreciation for her family’s heritage; recently divorced, she was free to indulge her expat fantasies; and, unsettled by political events at home, she sought a refuge for her brood.
Publication date: 2025-04-16

Maggie Filardo never met her paternal grandfather, who died before she was born. But Pietro Antonio Filardo gave his granddaughter one of the greatest gifts of her life: Italian citizenship. Five years ago, after going through a process she began near the beginning of the first Trump administration, the American-born Filardo and her two children became dual citizens through her ancestry. She cited several reasons for pursuing a second citizenship: With none of her Italian relatives still living, she wanted to instill in her offspring an appreciation for her family’s heritage; recently divorced, she was free to indulge her expat fantasies; and, unsettled by political events at home, she sought a refuge for her brood.

“I was worried about the United States as a place for my children to grow up and continue to live,” said Filardo, 45, a physician in New York City. “Times change, fortunes change, and I wanted them to have an alternative.”

Tourists are limited by their guest status. Dual citizens, however, are granted many of the same privileges as locals. They can purchase property, apply for jobs, attend school, acquire a passport and stay for as long as they wish. (Some perks, such as voting and health care, may require residency.)

U.S. citizens can obtain another country’s citizenship through a variety of means, such as investment; naturalization; or descent, officially known as jus sanguinis, the Latin term for “right of blood.” The ancestral track is often the most achievable, because it doesn’t require a fat bank account, long-term residency in a foreign country or advanced Duolingo lessons. A direct relative from abroad will suffice.

“The most common route is by descent, typically through a grandparent,” said Peter Spiro, a law professor at Temple University who has written books on dual citizenship. “An increasing number of Americans are now doing this.”

The benefits of dual citizenship

You already have U.S. citizenship and a passport, which ranks as one of the most powerful in the world. Why do you need another?

So many reasons. For new adventures and opportunities — personal, professional, academic and/or financial. To connect with your heritage on a deeper level. For retirement planning, or to alleviate your tax burden. For ease of foreign travel, including speedier border entry and local discounts. To escape political unrest or social turmoil.

Armand Arton, CEO of Arton Capital, an international agency that specializes in second residencies and citizenships, said many of his company’s clients seek second citizenship as a “Plan B.” Whether they relocate to their backup address or not, they are comforted by the idea of a safe haven, a place where they can retreat if their corner of the world goes haywire.

“The last four months have accelerated that feeling for a part of the population in the United States,” Arton said.

Matthew S. Dunn, an immigration lawyer at Kramer Levin, said people are fleeing more than just the policies of President Donald Trump and his predecessor.

“People from both sides of the aisle or a range of political beliefs are looking for a more stable environment,” Dunn said. “They feel that their beliefs are not in line with either administration and want to get away from it.”

Basil Mohr-Elzeki, managing partner at Henley & Partners, said his firm has noticed an “unprecedented increase” in demand from U.S. citizens, who make up nearly a quarter of his customer base, up from 4 percent in 2018. They are especially interested in citizenship from a European Union country, a skeleton key that will open doors to all 27 members.

“It’s quite powerful,” Mohr-Elzeki said of E.U. citizenship.

Dual citizenship wasn’t always so coveted, Spiro said. As recently as the late 20th century, it was considered an act of treason. Today, it is a status symbol, the calling card of globe-trotters.

“Since the end of the Cold War, we’ve witnessed close to an 180-degree shift in attitude,” Spiro said.

How to check eligibility in the U.K., Ireland and Poland

To determine whether you are eligible for citizenship by ancestry, examine your family tree, focusing on the main branches. In general, lineage must come directly through a parent or grandparent, not an aunt or brother.

Once you have a list of countries with a verifiable generational link, confirm that the governments allow multiple citizenships. Be careful, because some countries require you to renounce your primary citizenship.

The U.S. permits dual citizenship, as does most of Europe and much of Africa, including South Africa, Nigeria and Kenya. Asia has more “holdout” countries, Spiro said, such as Singapore, Japan, Malaysia, Vietnam, India and Indonesia. The Middle East is a mixed bag. Jordan, Turkey and Lebanon allow it; Qatar, Bahrain and Oman do not. Henley & Partners lists more than 145 countries that permit multiple citizenships, though some favor investments over ancestry.

Next, check to see whether you qualify.

A country’s consulate or agency that handles citizenship might illustrate the scenarios — a grandparent was born in the country, for instance, or a parent with citizenship was not — so you can find the one that best matches your family history.

Dates and circumstances can be important. The United Kingdom’s gov.uk lists several categories for applicants with a British parent, based on birth date: on or after July 1, 2006; between 1983 and June 2006; or before 1983. The conditions are slightly different in those age categories.

Some nations have less demanding qualifications than others. Citizenship specialists often mention Ireland and Poland as relatively easy, especially compared with France, Scandinavia and Italy.

“Italy is pretty complicated, but Ireland is straightforward,” Spiro said. “It’s almost like just signing up.”

Acquiring Polish citizenship can be as simple as obtaining your grandparent’s birth certificate, Mohr-Elzeki said.

“They would not have to learn the language or demonstrate ties to the country. They could do this at a distance as long as the grandparents were Polish citizens,” he said.

The process becomes a bit more complicated if the relative became a citizen of their adopted home, severing the ancestral line. However, in many cases, you can still obtain citizenship if your grandparent was still a citizen of their homeland at the time of your parent’s birth.

That is how Filardo qualified.

“I knew my grandfather was born in Italy. I knew my grandparents came to this country and my father was born right after,” Filardo said. “It’s not like there was any question that these people were Italian and I had a right to the citizenship.”

While some countries are opening their arms wider to new citizens, others are moving in the opposite direction.

Last month, Italy capped lineage at parents and grandparents, removing great-grandparents from the roster of accepted relatives. It is also shifting the application process from Italian consulates and municipalities to one office in Rome.

Marco Permunian, lead attorney at Italian Dual Citizenship, which facilitates more than 2,000 applications a year, said the changes could shrink the pool of eligible applicants. Meanwhile, the consolidation of services to one site could create a backlog. He warned that the processing period could stretch beyond the average wait time of 2½ years.

“The community in North America is very frustrated,” Permunian said during a phone call from his office in Italy. “It’s a moment of uncertainty right now.”

Privileges for descendants of immigrants fleeing persecution

Several years ago, Heather Foster — who dreams of retiring in Europe with her husband — learned from a colleague about another path to citizenship: reparative citizenship. This category grants citizenship to descendants whose family members were expelled from their home country or denied citizenship because of war or persecution.

The co-worker “was getting Austrian citizenship as part of Holocaust reparations, so I started looking into it,” said Foster, 44, who works in health care. “My grandfather fled Austria during the Holocaust, so I realized I might be eligible as well.”

According to the Austrian Embassy in Washington, descendants may be eligible for citizenship if their family member “feared or suffered persecution by organs of the National Socialist German Workers’ Party … or of the authorities of the German Reich.” This group includes Austrians who “died due to persecution or were deported abroad before May 9, 1945.”

Similarly, German law states that the country will naturalize “victims of persecution by the Nazi regime who were deprived of their German nationality on political, racial or religious grounds” between Jan. 30, 1933, and May 8, 1945 — the date of the country’s World War II surrender. The law also covers their descendants.

In Spain, the 2007 Historical Memory Law, which was expanded 15 years later, attempts to repair injustices that occurred during the Spanish Civil War and Franco’s dictatorship. Descendants of Spanish parents or grandparents who were exiled — for political, ideological or religious reasons, or because of sexual orientation or identity — may be entitled to citizenship.

Benin recently passed a law granting citizenship to descendants of sub-Saharan Africans who were forcibly removed from the continent in the transatlantic slave trade. Nearly 20 years ago, Sierra Leone overturned a law that prohibited dual citizenship, a welcoming gesture to Sierra Leoneans in the African diaspora. Through Ghana’s “Year of Return” program in 2019 and subsequent initiatives, hundreds of people from the diaspora have earned citizenship. The West African country also extends “right of abode” rights to these community members, allowing them to live and work there without restrictions.

During the Holocaust, Foster’s grandfather fled to the U.S. via Switzerland. Though he survived the war, she said she is sensitive to the fact that her Austrian citizenship is tied to his plight.

“I was pleased to learn about this opportunity. Pleased is not quite the right word, though, because it comes with so much history and baggage and trauma,” she said. “It’s an unfortunate way to gain citizenship.”

This summer, Foster hopes to visit Austria as a citizen.

How much it costs to pursue dual citizenship

Applying for citizenship can feel like tumbling down a 23andMe hole. You may become very familiar with your ancestral history and might even pick up a few new words in the native tongue.

“Some of the records are in the home countries, so you really have to do a deep dive,” said Dunn, the immigration lawyer at Kramer Levin.

On vacation in Italy in 2001, Filardo visited her grandfather’s village in Calabria to retrieve his birth certificate. In late 2019, she moved to Italy for a year to establish residency, circumventing the long wait to secure an appointment with the Italian Consulate in New York City.

“If you declare you live in New York City with millions of other Italian Americans,” Filardo said, “getting an appointment to get your citizenship is almost impossible.”

For her Austrian application, Foster relied heavily on an aunt who resides in her grandfather’s former house in New Jersey and oversees boxes of archival documents. She frequently called upon Google Translate as well.

If the application isn’t too complex or the documents too difficult to collect, citizenship experts say, the applicant can lean on their own research and administrative skills. Foster completed the process herself, paying minimal expenses that added up to a few hundred dollars.

“The costs are mostly related to sending in documents to be authenticated,” she said. “It’s $20 here, $20 there, $50 for the fingerprinting, and then mostly mailing everything overnight to get it authenticated.”

Filardo plunked down more money. She hired a lawyer in Italy, paying about $5,700 for his assistance with residency and the application. However, she spent less than some of Permunian’s clients, who commit upward of $10,000 for a second citizenship.

“It isn’t surprising to me how many businesses have cropped up offering to help people with this as a service,” Filardo said. “For years, it was like a part-time job.”

But now, Filardo can retire from it in Italy.
